README.md, before:

![Minimol architecture](figs/minimol-architecture.png)

A parameter-efficient molecular featuriser that generalises well to biological tasks thanks to the effective pre-training on biological and quantum mechnical datasets.

The model has been introduced in the paper [𝙼𝚒𝚗𝚒𝙼𝚘𝚕: A Parameter-Efficient Foundation Model for Molecular Learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14986), published in the ICML workshop on *Accessible and Efficient Foundation Models for Biological Discovery* in 2024.

## Usage

Embeddings can be generated in four lines of code:

```
from minimol import Minimol
model = Minimol()
smiles = [
    'COc1ccc2cc(C(=O)NC3(C(=O)N[C@H](Cc4ccccc4)C(=O)NCC4CCN(CC5CCOCC5)CC4)CCCC3)sc2c1',
    'Nc1nc(=O)c2c([nH]1)NCC(CNc1ccc(C(=O)NC(CCC(=O)O)C(=O)O)cc1)N2C=O',
    'O=C1CCCN1CCCCN1CCN(c2cc(C(F)(F)F)ccn2)CC1',
    'c1ccc(-c2cccnc2)cc1',
]
model(smiles)
>> A list of 4 tensors of (512,) shape
```

For training a downstream model on the fingerprints see [`./notebooks/downstream_adaptation.ipnyb`](https://github.com/graphcore-research/minimol/blob/master/notebooks/downstream_adaptation.ipynb).

## Installation

### Pip
When used with cuda, use `nvcc --version` to see which version of the driver is installed on your machine, to select the wheel (cuXXX):
```
pip install torch-sparse torch-cluster torch-scatter -f https://pytorch-geometric.com/whl/torch-2.3.0+cu124.html
pip install minimol
```

### Local
``` 
git clone git@github.com:graphcore-research/minimol.git 
cd minimol
mamba env create -f env.yml -n minimol_venv
mamba activate minimol
```
*To install mamba see [the official documentation](https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/mamba-installation.html).*

## Performance

The model has been evaluated on 22 benchmarks from the ADMET group of [Therapeutics Data Commons (TDC)](https://tdcommons.ai). These are the results when comparing to [MolE](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.02657) and TOP5 models from the TDC leaderboard (as of June 2024):

| TDC Dataset          |          |            | TDC Leaderboard | MolE           |          | MiniMol (GINE)|          |
|----------------------|----------|------------|-----------------|----------------|----------|---------------|----------|
| **Name**             | **Size** | **Metric** | **SoTA Result** | **Result**     | **Rank** | **Result**    | **Rank** |
| **Absorption**       |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| Caco2 Wang           | 906      | MAE        | 0.276 ± 0.005   | 0.310 ± 0.010  | 6        | 0.350 ± 0.018 | 7        |
| Bioavailability Ma   | 640      | AUROC      | 0.748 ± 0.033   | 0.654 ± 0.028  | 7        | 0.689 ± 0.020 | 5        |
| Lipophilicity AZ     | 4,200    | MAE        | 0.467 ± 0.006   | 0.469 ± 0.009  | 3        | 0.456 ± 0.008 | 1        |
| Solubility AqSolDB   | 9,982    | MAE        | 0.761 ± 0.025   | 0.792 ± 0.005  | 5        | 0.741 ± 0.013 | 1        |
| HIA Hou              | 578      | AUROC      | 0.989 ± 0.001   | 0.963 ± 0.019  | 7        | 0.993 ± 0.005 | 1        |
| Pgp Broccatelli      | 1,212    | AUROC      | 0.938 ± 0.002   | 0.915 ± 0.005  | 7        | 0.942 ± 0.002 | 1        |
| **Distribution**     |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| BBB Martins          | 1,975    | AUROC      | 0.916 ± 0.001   | 0.903 ± 0.005  | 7        | 0.924 ± 0.003 | 1        |
| PPBR AZ              | 1,797    | MAE        | 7.526 ± 0.106   | 8.073 ± 0.335  | 6        | 7.696 ± 0.125 | 4        |
| VDss Lombardo        | 1,130    | Spearman   | 0.713 ± 0.007   | 0.654 ± 0.031  | 3        | 0.535 ± 0.027 | 7        |
| **Metabolism**       |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| CYP2C9 Veith         | 12,092   | AUPRC      | 0.859 ± 0.001   | 0.801 ± 0.003  | 5        | 0.823 ± 0.006 | 4        |
| CYP2D6 Veith         | 13,130   | AUPRC      | 0.790 ± 0.001   | 0.682 ± 0.008  | 6        | 0.719 ± 0.004 | 5        |
| CYP3A4 Veith         | 12,328   | AUPRC      | 0.916 ± 0.000   | 0.867 ± 0.003  | 7        | 0.877 ± 0.001 | 4        |
| CYP2C9 Substrate     | 666      | AUPRC      | 0.441 ± 0.033   | 0.446 ± 0.062  | 2        | 0.474 ± 0.025 | 1        |
| CYP2D6 Substrate     | 664      | AUPRC      | 0.736 ± 0.024   | 0.699 ± 0.018  | 7        | 0.695 ± 0.032 | 6        |
| CYP3A4 Substrate     | 667      | AUROC      | 0.662 ± 0.031   | 0.670 ± 0.018  | 1        | 0.663 ± 0.008 | 2        |
| **Excretion**        |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| Half Life Obach      | 667      | Spearman   | 0.562 ± 0.008   | 0.549 ± 0.024  | 4        | 0.495 ± 0.042 | 6        |
| Clearance Hepatocyte | 1,102    | Spearman   | 0.498 ± 0.009   | 0.381 ± 0.038  | 7        | 0.446 ± 0.029 | 3        |
| Clearance Microsome  | 1,020    | Spearman   | 0.630 ± 0.010   | 0.607 ± 0.027  | 6        | 0.628 ± 0.005 | 2        |
| **Toxicity**         |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| LD50 Zhu             | 7,385    | MAE        | 0.552 ± 0.009   | 0.823 ± 0.019  | 7        | 0.585 ± 0.005 | 2        |
| hERG                 | 648      | AUROC      | 0.880 ± 0.002   | 0.813 ± 0.009  | 7        | 0.846 ± 0.016 | 4        |
| Ames                 | 7,255    | AUROC      | 0.871 ± 0.002   | 0.883 ± 0.005  | 1        | 0.849 ± 0.004 | 5        |
| DILI                 | 475      | AUROC      | 0.925 ± 0.005   | 0.577 ± 0.021  | 7        | 0.956 ± 0.006 | 1        |
|                      |          |            |                 | **Mean Rank:** | 5.2      |               | 3.3      |

## License

Copyright (c) 2024 Graphcore Ltd. Licensed under the MIT License.

The included code is released under the MIT license (see [details of the license](LICENSE)).

Commit message:

add colab button for the notebook

README.md, after:

![Minimol architecture](figs/minimol-architecture.png)

A parameter-efficient molecular featuriser that generalises well to biological tasks thanks to the effective pre-training on biological and quantum mechnical datasets.

The model has been introduced in the paper [𝙼𝚒𝚗𝚒𝙼𝚘𝚕: A Parameter-Efficient Foundation Model for Molecular Learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14986), published in the ICML workshop on *Accessible and Efficient Foundation Models for Biological Discovery* in 2024.

## Usage

Embeddings can be generated in four lines of code:

```
from minimol import Minimol
model = Minimol()
smiles = [
    'COc1ccc2cc(C(=O)NC3(C(=O)N[C@H](Cc4ccccc4)C(=O)NCC4CCN(CC5CCOCC5)CC4)CCCC3)sc2c1',
    'Nc1nc(=O)c2c([nH]1)NCC(CNc1ccc(C(=O)NC(CCC(=O)O)C(=O)O)cc1)N2C=O',
    'O=C1CCCN1CCCCN1CCN(c2cc(C(F)(F)F)ccn2)CC1',
    'c1ccc(-c2cccnc2)cc1',
]
model(smiles)
>> A list of 4 tensors of (512,) shape
```

For a Colab notebook showing how to use Minimol's fingerprints to achieve SoTA results on a downstream task, click here: [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/graphcore-research/minimol/blob/main/notebooks/downstream_adaptation.ipynb)

## Installation

### Pip
When used with cuda, use `nvcc --version` to see which version of the driver is installed on your machine, to select the wheel (cuXXX):
```
pip install torch-sparse torch-cluster torch-scatter -f https://pytorch-geometric.com/whl/torch-2.3.0+cu124.html
pip install minimol
```

### Local
``` 
git clone git@github.com:graphcore-research/minimol.git 
cd minimol
mamba env create -f env.yml -n minimol_venv
mamba activate minimol
```
*To install mamba see [the official documentation](https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/mamba-installation.html).*

## Performance

The model has been evaluated on 22 benchmarks from the ADMET group of [Therapeutics Data Commons (TDC)](https://tdcommons.ai). These are the results when comparing to [MolE](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.02657) and TOP5 models from the TDC leaderboard (as of June 2024):

| TDC Dataset          |          |            | TDC Leaderboard | MolE           |          | MiniMol (GINE)|          |
|----------------------|----------|------------|-----------------|----------------|----------|---------------|----------|
| **Name**             | **Size** | **Metric** | **SoTA Result** | **Result**     | **Rank** | **Result**    | **Rank** |
| **Absorption**       |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| Caco2 Wang           | 906      | MAE        | 0.276 ± 0.005   | 0.310 ± 0.010  | 6        | 0.350 ± 0.018 | 7        |
| Bioavailability Ma   | 640      | AUROC      | 0.748 ± 0.033   | 0.654 ± 0.028  | 7        | 0.689 ± 0.020 | 5        |
| Lipophilicity AZ     | 4,200    | MAE        | 0.467 ± 0.006   | 0.469 ± 0.009  | 3        | 0.456 ± 0.008 | 1        |
| Solubility AqSolDB   | 9,982    | MAE        | 0.761 ± 0.025   | 0.792 ± 0.005  | 5        | 0.741 ± 0.013 | 1        |
| HIA Hou              | 578      | AUROC      | 0.989 ± 0.001   | 0.963 ± 0.019  | 7        | 0.993 ± 0.005 | 1        |
| Pgp Broccatelli      | 1,212    | AUROC      | 0.938 ± 0.002   | 0.915 ± 0.005  | 7        | 0.942 ± 0.002 | 1        |
| **Distribution**     |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| BBB Martins          | 1,975    | AUROC      | 0.916 ± 0.001   | 0.903 ± 0.005  | 7        | 0.924 ± 0.003 | 1        |
| PPBR AZ              | 1,797    | MAE        | 7.526 ± 0.106   | 8.073 ± 0.335  | 6        | 7.696 ± 0.125 | 4        |
| VDss Lombardo        | 1,130    | Spearman   | 0.713 ± 0.007   | 0.654 ± 0.031  | 3        | 0.535 ± 0.027 | 7        |
| **Metabolism**       |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| CYP2C9 Veith         | 12,092   | AUPRC      | 0.859 ± 0.001   | 0.801 ± 0.003  | 5        | 0.823 ± 0.006 | 4        |
| CYP2D6 Veith         | 13,130   | AUPRC      | 0.790 ± 0.001   | 0.682 ± 0.008  | 6        | 0.719 ± 0.004 | 5        |
| CYP3A4 Veith         | 12,328   | AUPRC      | 0.916 ± 0.000   | 0.867 ± 0.003  | 7        | 0.877 ± 0.001 | 4        |
| CYP2C9 Substrate     | 666      | AUPRC      | 0.441 ± 0.033   | 0.446 ± 0.062  | 2        | 0.474 ± 0.025 | 1        |
| CYP2D6 Substrate     | 664      | AUPRC      | 0.736 ± 0.024   | 0.699 ± 0.018  | 7        | 0.695 ± 0.032 | 6        |
| CYP3A4 Substrate     | 667      | AUROC      | 0.662 ± 0.031   | 0.670 ± 0.018  | 1        | 0.663 ± 0.008 | 2        |
| **Excretion**        |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| Half Life Obach      | 667      | Spearman   | 0.562 ± 0.008   | 0.549 ± 0.024  | 4        | 0.495 ± 0.042 | 6        |
| Clearance Hepatocyte | 1,102    | Spearman   | 0.498 ± 0.009   | 0.381 ± 0.038  | 7        | 0.446 ± 0.029 | 3        |
| Clearance Microsome  | 1,020    | Spearman   | 0.630 ± 0.010   | 0.607 ± 0.027  | 6        | 0.628 ± 0.005 | 2        |
| **Toxicity**         |          |            |                 |                |          |               |          |
| LD50 Zhu             | 7,385    | MAE        | 0.552 ± 0.009   | 0.823 ± 0.019  | 7        | 0.585 ± 0.005 | 2        |
| hERG                 | 648      | AUROC      | 0.880 ± 0.002   | 0.813 ± 0.009  | 7        | 0.846 ± 0.016 | 4        |
| Ames                 | 7,255    | AUROC      | 0.871 ± 0.002   | 0.883 ± 0.005  | 1        | 0.849 ± 0.004 | 5        |
| DILI                 | 475      | AUROC      | 0.925 ± 0.005   | 0.577 ± 0.021  | 7        | 0.956 ± 0.006 | 1        |
|                      |          |            |                 | **Mean Rank:** | 5.2      |               | 3.3      |

## License

Copyright (c) 2024 Graphcore Ltd. Licensed under the MIT License.

The included code is released under the MIT license (see [details of the license](LICENSE)).
